Conway’s Game of Life with React - Reflection


In this implementation of the Game of Life, I used React because it’s
a great framework for rapidly changing data and updating the DOM efficiently.
React’s virtual DOM and diff-ing algorithm ensure that each update to the DOM
only updates what has changed, allowing smooth performance of the game even with
very short generation intervals. The structure of the game also lends itself
well to React — it’s easy to imagine each cell as a component, with the parent
component setting the state of cell on each generation.

With this concept in mind, I began by creating a simple Cell component with three
properties: alive, row, and column. The Cell can then handle its style changes based
off its properties (such as becoming black when alive). Next, I created a Grid
component which renders multiple cells from an array of cell objects. I used an array
for this so they would maintain their order and display property in the UI.

When the cell array is created initially, each is assigned an ‘alive’ value based on
Math.random() < d where d is a density value chosen by the user. The user can then, if
they choose, clear all the live cells and manually choose their initial state by clicking
each cell. The user can also re-render the cells by clicking randomize, changing the density,
or changing the size of the grid. The boundary condition can also be toggled between
Toroidal (edge cells are adjacent to the cells on the opposite edge) and Dead (edge cells
are adjacent to dead ‘cells’).

When the game is running, most settings are disabled since they would require the
grid to be re-rendered or would disrupt the flow of the game. Speed can be changed
while running, however.

When considering optimizations, I decided to include a cell object map along with the
array so they could be looked up with constant time. This is beneficial for the generation
iteration since it must do 9 look ups for each cell — 8 neighbors and the cell itself, to
decide if the cell will live to the next generation. The tradeoff is having to update the
cell object map along with the array whenever it changes.

Lastly, on the UI — I decided to limit the customization of grid size, density, and
speed, to a few set options. This allowed me to focus on the functionality of the game
rather than input validation. Allowing more fine-grained options is something I would
consider in a future iteration.

Questions I’ve been pondering:
-Is it necessary to lookup all 8 neighbors for every cell or are there some eliminations
I can make?
-Can I get away with using only the object map so I don’t have to maintain 2 cell datasets?
-How can I efficiently maintain the display order of the cells without the array?


